Add sections on subset and select (#29)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/df_end.md

However, converting a DataFrame to a Dictionary is only useful when the elements are unique.
When that is not the case, it is time to `filter` (@sec:filter).

## Filter and Subset {#sec:filter_subset}

> There are two ways to remove rows from a DataFrame, one is `filter` (@sec:filter) and another one is `subset` (@sec:subset).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to remove rows from a DataFrame, one is `filter` (@sec:filter) and the other is `subset` (@sec:subset).
```

`filter` was added earlier to `DataFrames.jl`, is more powerful, and more consistent with syntax from Julia base, so that is why we start with discussing `filter`.

> `subset` is a newer, and often more convenient version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`subset` is newer and often more convenient version.
```

### Filter {#sec:filter}

> From this point on, we start to really get to grips with `DataFrames.jl`.

Reviewer: I don't understand what "get to grips" mean here?

> To this end, we need to learn some verbs, such as `select` and `filter`, but it might be a relieve to know that the general design goal of `DataFrames.jl` is to keep the number of verbs that a user has to learn to a minimum[^verbs].

Reviewer: Why mention `select` here? Isn't it better to stick with just `filter`. Is the added complexity necessary?

Author: Because I needed an example for the word "verbs". Without these examples, I don't think that it's clear what a "verb" means here in this context. I'll merge it now, but you are welcome to bring it up later again of course :)

> To get all the rows which are **not** Alice, `==` can be replaced by `!=` in all previous examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get all the rows which are *not* Alice, `==` can be replaced by `!=` in all previous examples:
```

Italics are better in this case I think, but feel free to overrule...

```jl
s = """filter(:name => !=("Alice"), grades_2020())"""
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, to show why anonymous functions are so powerful, we can come up with a more complex filter.
In this filter, we want to have the people whos name start with A or B **and** who have a grade above a 6:

```jl
s = """
    function complex_filter(name, grade)::Bool
        interesting_name = startswith(name, 'A') || startswith(name, 'B')
        interesting_grade = 6 < grade
        interesting_name && interesting_grade
    end
    """
sc(s)
```

```jl
s = "filter([:name, :grade_2020] => complex_filter, grades_2020())"
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

### Subset {#sec:subset}

The `subset` function was added to make it easier to work with missing values (@sec:missing_data).

> In contrast to `filter`, the `subset` function works on complete columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast to `filter`, `subset` function works on complete columns.
```

If we want to use our earlier defined functions, we can use `ByRow`:

```jl
s = "subset(grades_2020(), :name => ByRow(equals_alice))"
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

Also note that the DataFrame is now the first argument, whereas it was the second argument in `filter`, that is, use `filter(f, df)` and use `subset(df, args...)`.
The reason for this is that Julia defines filter as `filter(f, V::Vector)` and the developers of `DataFrames.jl` chose to be consistent with that.

> Just like with `filter`, we can also use anonymous functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like with `filter`, we can also use anonymous functions inside `subset`:
```

```jl
s = "subset(grades_2020(), :name => ByRow(name -> name == \"Alice\"))"
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

Or, the partial function application for `==`:

```jl
s = "subset(grades_2020(), :name => ByRow(==(\"Alice\")))"
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> To, now, show the real power of `subset`, let's create a dataset with some missing values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultimately, let's show the real power of `subset`.
First, we create a dataset with some missing values:
```

Too much "now" in the text...

```jl
@sco salaries()
```

> This data is about an imaginary situation where you want to figure out how many your colleagues earn, and haven't figured it out for Zed yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data is about a plausible situation where you want to figure out how many your colleagues earn, and haven't figured it out for Zed yet.
```

who is "Zed"?

Author: You'll see when I merge and the site is updated :stuck_out_tongue:

Even though we don't want to encourage these practices, we suspect it is an interesting example.
Say that we want to know who earns more than 2000.
When using `filter` without taking the `missing` values into account, it will fail:

```jl
s = "filter(:salary => >(2_000), salaries())"
sce(s, post=trim_last_n_lines(25))
```

> `subset` will also fail, but guide us to an easy solution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`subset` will also fail, but will point us toward an easy solution:
```

```jl
s = "subset(salaries(), :salary => ByRow(>(2_000)))"
sce(s, post=trim_last_n_lines(25))
```

> So, we just need to pass `skipmissing=true`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, we just need to pass the argument `skipmissing=true`:
```

```jl
s = "subset(salaries(), :salary => ByRow(>(2_000)); skipmissing=true)"
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

## Select {#sec:select}

Whereas `filter` removes rows, `select` removes columns.

> However, this function is much more versatile than just removing columns, as we will descuss in this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, `select` is much more versatile than just removing columns, as we will discuss in this section.
```

> Lets create a dataset with multiple columns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fist, let's create a dataset with multiple columns:
```

```jl
@sco responses()
```

Here, the data represents answers on five questions (`q1`, `q2`, ..., `q5`) in a questionnaire.

> Let's first "select" a few columns from this dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will start by "selecting" a few columns from this dataset.
```

Again, we use symbols to specify columns:

```jl
s = "select(responses(), :id, :q1)"
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> But, we can also use strings if we want:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use strings if we want:
```

```jl
s = """select(responses(), "id", "q1", "q2")"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> To select everything _except_ one or more columns, use `Not` with a column name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To select everything _except_ one or more columns, use `Not` with either a single column name:
```

```jl
s = """select(responses(), Not(:q5))"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

Or, with multiple column names:

```jl
s = """select(responses(), Not([:q4, :q5]))"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

It's also fine to combine column names with `Not`:

```jl
s = """select(responses(), :q5, Not(:id))"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

Note how `q5` is now the first column.
But, there is a more clever way to do this, and that is with `:`.
The colon `:` can be thought of as "all the columns that we didn't include yet".
For example:

```jl
s = """select(responses(), :q5, :)"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

Or, to put `q5` at the second position[^sudete]:

[^sudete]: Thanks to Sudete on [Discourse](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/pull-dataframes-columns-to-the-front/60327/4) for this suggestion.

```jl
s = "select(responses(), 1, :q5, :)"
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> Even renaming is possible via select:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even renaming columns is possible via `select`:
```

```jl
s = """select(responses(), 1 => "participant", :q1 => "age", :q2 => "nationality")"""
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> which, thanks to the `...` operator, we can also write as:

Reviewer: Have we explained the splat operator? Or is its first appearance? Shall we need to cover in "Julia 101" chapter? Or in a footnote?

Author: https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience/issues/31

```jl
s = """
    renames = (1 => "participant", :q1 => "age", :q2 => "nationality")
    select(responses(), renames...)
    """
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> **Note:** Another example of splatting via the `...` operator is:
> ```jl
  s = """
      V = ["a", "b", "c"]
      joinpath(V...)
      """
  scob(s)
  ```

## Types and Missing Data {#sec:missing_data}

```{=comment}
Try to combine with transformations

categorical
allowmissing
disallowmissing
```

As discussed in @sec:load_save, `CSV.jl` will do its best to guess data types for your data.
However, this won't always work perfectly.

> In this section, we show why good types are important and we fix wrong data types.

Reviewer: What is "good types"? I think we should change this connotation...

Author: I've changed it to "suitable" :dancers:

To be more clear about the types, we show the text output for DataFrames instead of a pretty table.
In this section, we work with the following dataset:

```jl
@sco process=string post=output_block wrong_types()
```

> Because the date column has the wrong type, sorting won't work correctly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the `date` column has the wrong type, sorting won't work correctly:
```
I forgot our standard thing? Are we using ... for column names/variables names?

```jl
s = "sort(wrong_types(), :date)"
scsob(s)
```

To fix the sorting, we can use `Date` as described in @sec:dates:

```jl
@sco process=string post=output_block fix_date_column(wrong_types())
```

Now, sorting will work correctly:

```jl
s = """
    df = fix_date_column(wrong_types())
    sort(df, :date)
    """
scsob(s)
```

> For the age column, we have a similar problem:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `age` column, we have a similar problem:
```

I forgot our standard thing? Are we using `...` for column names/variables names?

```jl
s = "sort(wrong_types(), :age)"
scsob(s)
```

This isn't right, because an infant is younger than adults and adolescents.
The solution for this categorical data problem is to use `CategoricalArrays.jl`:

```
using CategoricalArrays
```

> with this package, we can add levels to our data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `CategoricalArrays.jl` package, we can add levels to our data:
```

```jl
@sco process=string post=output_block fix_age_column(wrong_types())
```

Now, we can sort the data correctly on the age column:

```jl
s = """
    df = fix_age_column(wrong_types())
    sort(df, :age)
    """
scsob(s)
```

Since we have worked with functions, we can now define our fixed data as:

```jl
@sco process=string post=output_block correct_types()
```

> Note that setting `ordered` to `true` told `CategoricalArrays.jl` that the data is ordinal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the argument `ordered` set to `true` signals `CategoricalArrays.jl` that the data is ordinal.
```

I think is an argument right?
